---
layout: post
title:  "Day 3: Malloc"
date:   2021-09-01 11:27:24 -0400
---

🍂 Mood: Happily enjoying my first pumpkin flavored items of the year.

🎵 Soundtrack: [Instrumental Study Playlist](https://open.spotify.com/playlist/37i9dQZF1DX9sIqqvKsjG8)

### 📚 Reading Github Issues

I started my day by reading the 11 new github issues that had been created since
yesterday. Two caught my eye.

1. [The first was about http/2](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48111),
   which is a topic I have spent a lot of time thinking about for Cloud Foundry.
   This issue linked to a [previously opened
   issue](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/39389) about max concurrent
   streams.  Changes have been submited relating this issue, but I think it
   might be fun in the future to reproduce the error and more closely examine
   the proposed fix.

2. [The second issue that caught my eye was about
   malloc](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48116). This caught my eye
   because I first saw the phrase "malloc" a few days ago when reading Julia
   Evans' post ["Patterns in Confusing
   Explanations"](https://jvns.ca/blog/confusing-explanations/). This is what
   started my rabbit hole for today.

### 🐰 Malloc

Based on the name I assumed that malloc had something to do with memory
allocation... and I was right!

🎥 I ended up watching the following videos:
* [Understanding malloc by Jonathan Sprinkle](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CZJ-6IiXoMs&ab_channel=JonathanSprinkle)
* [Pointers and dynamic memory - stack vs heap by
mycodeschool](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_8-ht2AKyH4&ab_channel=mycodeschool)
* [GopherCon UK 2018: Andre Carvalho - Understanding Go's Memory Allocator](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3CR4UNMK_Is&ab_channel=GopherConUK)

👀 Lower level topics like this make me wonder: did everyone else learn this
stuff in college?

**Things I learned**
* `malloc` is a C function used to allocate memory on the heap.
* There is a also a [`malloc.go`
  file in the runtime package](https://github.com/golang/go/blob/0bbfc5c31eb4cb77f12e10c73d5462377e66b06c/src/runtime/malloc.go)
  with great comments about how memory allocation is done in golang.
* Processes do not read directly from physical memory. This is for security
  reasons and coordination reasons.
* Each process' memory is divided up into pages (each page is usually 4kb).
* Each process has a page table, which maps its virtual pages to physical memory
  frames.
  * Andre's talk showed how to demonstrate that each process has its own virtual
    memory space, which I duplicated.

    ```
    package main

    import (
      "fmt"
      "math/rand"
      "time"
    )

    func main() {
      f()
    }

    func f() {

      // make a random integer
      rand.Seed(time.Now().UnixNano())
      i := rand.Intn(100)

      // print the int and its memory address
      fmt.Printf("%v at %p\n", i, &i)

      for {
        // don't let the program exit
      }
    }
    ```
  * Then run this program in multiple terminals at the same time
    ```
    $ ./main
    57 at 0xc00001c0b8

    // in another terminal
    $ ./main
    77 at 0xc00001c0b8
    ```
  * Look! Different integers use the same memory address at the same time! But
    they aren't really the same memory address. Just the same address in
    different virtual memory spaces.
* Andre also talked about Thread-Caching Malloc (TCMalloc), which was originally
  implemented by Google for C. It is what the Go runtime allocator is based off
  of. It was super fun to think about algorithms in a way that I haven't had to
  since I was interviewing for jobs. It's cool to think that some programers
  actually get to think about this!
* I also duplicated some things Andrew did to see the actions the compiler is
  doing regarding stack vs heap.
  * In this example I make a pointer and show that it is allocated to the heap!
    ```
    // main.go
    package main

    func main() {
      f()
    }

    func f() *int {
      i := 10
      return &i
    }
    ```
    Then run:
    ```
    $ go build -gcflags "-m " main.go

    # command-line-arguments
    ./main.go:7:6: can inline f
    ./main.go:3:6: can inline main
    ./main.go:4:3: inlining call to f
    ./main.go:8:2: moved to heap: i 👈👈👈👈
    ```
  * i is on the heap!!
  * if you return just an int, you will see it is not moved to the heap
    ```
    // main.go
    package main

    func main() {
      f()
    }

    func f() int {
      i := 10
      return i
    }
    ```
    Then run:
    ```
    $ go build -gcflags "-m -m" main.go

    # command-line-arguments
    ./main.go:7:6: can inline f with cost 7 as: func() int { i := 10; return i }
    ./main.go:3:6: can inline main with cost 9 as: func() { f() }
    ./main.go:4:3: inlining call to f func() int { i := 10; return i }
    👈👈👈👈 // nothing about heap here
    ```


### 💾 My Attempt to Remember the Memory Allocation in Go

1. Your program asks for 20 B of memory.
2. There are three different algorithms based on the size of memory requested:
  * tiny allocations < 16 B
  * small allocations < 32 kB
  * large allocations > 32 kB
3. 30 B is a "small" allocation.
4. Go has [66 small size
classes](https://github.com/golang/go/blob/88859f3cd80e03f695cba5462d959949ff9a5583/src/runtime/sizeclasses.go#L6-L73).
5. Go rounds up the amount of memory requested to the nearest size class. The
nearest size class for 20 B is class 3, which is 24 B.
6. Go first checks in the process' `mcache` to see if it has enough memory of
the right size to give our program. This does not need a lock because it is
scoped to the process. The `mcache` for each process has a `mspan` for each size
class. These spans can allocate objects for their particular size class. Go
looks to see if the span for class 3 is full.
   1. If it is not full, then the span returns an object for the process to use.
   Done!
   1. If it is full, then the `mcache` has to get more memory from `mcentral`.
7. `mcentral` does a similar search to see if it has available memory of the
correct size. Since `mcentral` is shared between threads it requires a lock to
access.
8. If `mcentral` does not have the correct sized memory then it recurses to the
`Central Heap`.
9. If `Central Heap` does not have the correct sized memory then it requests the
correct size from the OS.
10. I'm skipping lots of facinating details about the data structures used at
    each level.

🧐 Now that I am writing this, I can't remember why there are so many recursions
here. Why does there need to be an `mcentral` _and_ a `central heap`? It's my
EOD, so that sounds like a question for tomorrow! 😬 Hopefully these ramblings
will make sense to me tomorrow. At least enough so for me to pick up where I
left off.

### 🐰🕳  Meta Thoughts on Rabbit Holes

I am not usually a person who follows rabbit holes. I typically favor a "good
enough" approach in development and debugging. For example, I don't feel the
need to know why a version of XYZ dependancy is causing memory issues. If you
tell me it is, I am happy to bump the dependancy without the details. I am
usually interested in understanding the layer below where I work, but I don't
need to know 3 layers below. I am happy to trust that those layers are working
properly.

But that is not what this sabbatical is for! This sabbatical is for learning, so
I am trying to explore the questions that come to me. I think that learning more
about any part of golang or programming in general will only be a good thing.
