---
layout: post-with-before-and-after-links
title:  "Day 28: "
date:   2021-10-13 11:27:24 -0400
---

😎 Mood: Ready for a 3 day weekend

### 📚 Reading Github Issues
Back to my normally scheduled sabbatical plans. I got a little lazy though and
only read the most recent 25 issues. None of them stuck out.


### 📌 Contribution Updates

Yesterday [another
contribution](https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/go/+/346289) of mine was merged!

### 📬 Response Headers in Golang

Today I opened up a new issue related to the bug I was investigating two days
ago. Before Golang 1.16 the reverse proxy would _always_ use `Content-Length`
when sending small responses. After Golang 1.16 the reverse proxy will keep the
`Transfer-Encoding: chunked` header if that is what the backend sent.  This
broke some clients that don't support `Transfer-Encoding: chunked`. (Yes. I
know. I read the RFC for HTTP/1.1. All clients must support `Transfer-Encoding:
chunked`.)

Nothing in the release notes was obviously the cause of this change, so I wrote
a little script and used git bisect to figure out the commit that caused this.
In the end, we determined that it is not a bug for go, but that it would be nice
to document this change in the release notes. So I opened [this
issue](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48996).

### 🎥 Back to "Assembly Language & Computer Architecture"

I returned for the 3rd (and final) time to [this MIT
lecture](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-172-performance-engineering-of-software-systems-fall-2018/lecture-videos/lecture-4-assembly-language-computer-architecture/)
on "Assembly Language & Computer Architecture".

Today I learned about:
* how 5 stage processors work
  * Instruction Fetch (IF), Instruction Decode (ID), Execute (EX), Memory (MA),
    Write Back (WB)
* how 5 stage processors are nothing but white lies
* instruction-level parallelism (ILP)
* dependency hazards
  * structural - when 2 instructions attempt to use the same functional unit at
    the same time
  * data - when an instruction depends on the result of a prior instruction in
    the pipeline
  * control - when the processor can't be sure of what comes next because of conditional jumps, etc
* "How do you free yourself from the tyranny of one instruction after the
  other???"
* 🤯 Then there was a 10 second overview of using graphs to determine when there
  is a false/true dependence to speed things up.

### 🧩 Assembly in Go

Back to playing around with Go's assembly!

First I re-did my "odd" function using bitwise math like my internet friend
suggested.

💻 **oddWithBitwiseAnd** takes an integer input and prints if it is even or odd.
This function uses bitwise math and is O(1) unlike my last odd function which
was O(n).
```
TEXT ·oddWithBitwiseAnd(SB),NOSPLIT,$0
	MOVQ val+0(FP), BX
	ANDQ $1, BX
	JZ PRINT_EVEN // check the zero flag set by the bitwise AND
PRINT_ODD:
	CALL ·printOdd(SB)
	JMP END
PRINT_EVEN:
	CALL ·printEven(SB)
END:
	RET
```

Then I tried to do a handful of things that failed. Including:
* Using arrays
* Using strings
* Waiting for user input
* Making syscalls

The frustrating thing about writing in Go's assembly is that there are nearly
no docs on it and _very_ few examples. Most of the older examples don't work for
reasons I don't understand. The examples in the std library don't work when I
copy them into my code because the std library is able to do different things.
It has been annoying to try to learn about how to do things in a different
assembly language using _great_ resources and then try to piece together how to
translate that into Go's assembly.

I really want to make a little game in assembly! So I think when I get back
Monday (thanks for another 3 day weekend for no reason vmware) I am going to
start back using _only_ x86-64 since I like [this book so
much](http://www.egr.unlv.edu/~ed/assembly64.pdf).

😎 Heading out an hour early to make up for some of the time I spent being paged
this week.




