---
layout: post-with-before-and-after-links
title:  "Day 30: Making My Own Diagnostic"
date:   2021-10-19 11:27:24 -0400
---

😰 Mood: Frantically refreshing the live race results every hour on the hour for
[Big's Backyard Ultra](https://my.raceresult.com/183854/#0_B3DC1F). Currently 2
people left who have run 341 miles.

🎵 Soundtrack: ["wfh but make it jazz" playlist](https://open.spotify.com/playlist/2R4QYqWnKMQ0qpgGPxrFtM)

### 📚 Reading Github Issues
Nothing exciting.


### 🩺 Making My Own Diagnostic

After some other work stuff (boooooo), I got back to looking at gopls.

I was able to build gopls locally. (It was just`go install`, idk why I thought it would be
more complicated.) Then everything "just worked". VSCode pointed to my version
and I added some fun "meows" to the code to make sure.

I also learned that gopls has a CLI to test with so I don't need to reload
VSCode every time. Plus I was able to use the CLI to figure out that I am
looking to group _diagnostics_ together. Knowing that term will come in handy
when searching the code.

```
$ gopls check --help
show diagnostic results for the specified file

Usage: check [flags] <filename>

Example: show the diagnostic results of this file:

  $ gopls check internal/lsp/cmd/check.go
```

```
$ gopls check main.go
main.go:62:3-4: MEOW redundant type from array, slice, or map composite literal
main.go:63:3-4: MEOW redundant type from array, slice, or map composite literal
main.go:64:3-4: MEOW redundant type from array, slice, or map composite literal
main.go:65:3-4: MEOW redundant type from array, slice, or map composite literal
```
Can you can tell it's my dev version 🐱??

I was poking through the code trying to figure out where to even start and I
decided to learn how the code works by writing my own diagnostic. Initially my
goal was to create a diagnostic that searched for the word "amelia" (my name) in a
comment and suggested replacing it with "ameowlia" (my screen name).

Of course all parsing is done via ASTs. I never had to use ASTs before this
sabbatical. They have really come up a lot in all of the areas I have explored.
I had trouble finding the comments in the AST and eventually I determined that
it was because the code was parsed excluding comments. Ah.

I made a new goal to create a diagnostic that finds string variables with the word
"amelia" in them and replace "amelia" with "ameowlia".

I looked at [this diagnostic for "no new
vars"](https://github.com/golang/tools/blob/master/internal/lsp/analysis/nonewvars/nonewvars.go)
and [this one for simplifying composite
literals](https://github.com/golang/tools/blob/master/internal/lsp/analysis/simplifycompositelit/simplifycompositelit.go)
for inspiration. And I was able to get something (very basic) working.

<iframe
src="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1uiPYdMB1kASYvT0rG98kI4rGq4OTNRSS/preview"
width="640" height="480" allow="autoplay"></iframe>

What is missing:
* I'm struggling to get the quotes right when I replace it.
* Right now it replaces the whole string (including quotes) not just the part
  that says "amelia".
* All of the text descriptions are sloppy and are kinda bogus.

But it is progress!
