---
layout: post-with-before-and-after-links
title:  "Day 46: Artificial Lanauges"
date:   2021-11-10 11:27:24 -0400
---

### 👾 Artificial Languages

I spent my morning digging into this issue about [artificial languages not being
sorted correctly](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/45749).

It turns out that it is not just about artificial languages, it is about all
language tags that have a private tag (the `x` thing).

Going back to my new favorite rfc: [rfc4647 "Matching of Language Tags" section
3.4 "Lookup"](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4647#section-3.4) it
turns out that language matchers should take the `x` private-use sequences into
account when matching:

> In the lookup scheme, the language range is progressively truncated
from the end until a matching language tag is located.  Single letter or
digit subtags (including both the letter 'x', which introduces private-use
sequences, and the subtags that introduce extensions) are removed at the same
time as their closest trailing subtag.  For example, starting with the range
"zh-Hant-CN-x-private1-private2" (Chinese, Traditional script, China, two
private-use tags) the lookup progressively searches for content as shown
below:
>
> Example of a Lookup Fallback Pattern
>
> Range to match: zh-Hant-CN-x-private1-private2
> 1. zh-Hant-CN-x-private1-private2
> 2. zh-Hant-CN-x-private1
> 3. zh-Hant-CN
> 4. zh-Hant
> 5. zh
> 6. (default)

However, these private tags _aren't_ being taken into account. At first I
thought it might be a weird artificial language thing, but it turns out to be a
bug with EVERY language. Here is an example without artificial languages.
```
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"golang.org/x/text/language"
)

func main() {
	a, _ := language.Parse("en-x-a")
	b, _ := language.Parse("en-x-b")
	matcher := language.NewMatcher([]language.Tag{a, b})

	m, _, _ := matcher.Match(b) // Asks for the best match for "en-x-b"

	fmt.Println(m) // en-x-a :(
}
```

This ends up happening because the algorithm considers `art-x-a` to be an
exact match with `art-x-b`. It doesn't even check other options.

Strangely enough the code _looks_ like it checks the private use tags when it
calls the method `VariantOrPrivateUseTags`
[here](https://github.com/golang/text/blob/18b340fc7af22495828ffbe71e9f9e22583bc7a9/language/match.go#L696-L700).
But that function always returns an empty string for me! So it always reports
that the private use tags are identical!

I added a hacky fix for that, but it _still_ didn't fix the issue. Even if they
aren't equal the code doesn't check it again to lower the confidence level like
it does
[here](https://github.com/golang/text/blob/18b340fc7af22495828ffbe71e9f9e22583bc7a9/language/match.go#L576-L589)
for when there is a different in script or region. So in the end,
`art-x-a` is STILL listed as an exact match for `art-x-b`.

Then I added a fix for THAT! If the private tags were different I lowered the
confidence level to "high" so that the algorithm would keep searching through
the options and would eventually find the "exact" match. This worked... for my
example at least. It broke _a lot_ of tests because it lowered their confidence
levels from exact to high. Seems like an unwanted breaking change... maybe?

### 🔮 What's Next

I only have 4 more working days until the end of my sabbatical. Where did the
time go?

My goals for the next few days are:
* Write a comment with my findings for the artificial languages bug
* Write a blog post wrap up of my time in this experiment
* Write a presentation to give to my company about how my sabbatical went
* Write a proposal for what I want to work on next

😭 I miss this already.
