---
layout: post-with-before-and-after-links
title:  "Day 25: Minimizing bytes for go fuzz"
date:   2021-10-11 11:27:24 -0400
---

🪵 🍫🔥 Mood: Ready for some s'mores 😋

🎵 Soundtrack: [No Lyrics - Folk](https://open.spotify.com/playlist/5ZQvfXRFbTbxJco75ve3NV)

### 📚 Reading Github Issues
Caught up on the 36 github issues opened in the last 3 days.
* [One was about inefficient assembly
  code](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48882). This is exactly the reason
  that I started down my side quest of learning about compilers and assembly.
  Now I can read the assembly in the issue! Why/how someone noticed that the
  generated assembly code could be made more efficient by one command is still
  lost on me though.
* [This one also caught my eye](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48858).
  Suspicious.

### 📌 IP Testable Examples Update

Opening up an [issue](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48858) for my old
contribution for IP testable examples seems to have done the trick. The
reviewers got back to me with some suggestions, I changed my code, they approved,
and it should be merged any time now. Yay! This will be my 5th contribution!

At the onset of this sabbatical I had the idea to try to write testable examples
for everything in the net package as a way to learn the net package better. I
still like that idea and may continue to do it small bits at a time.

### 🧶 Make Go Fuzz Crashers Human Readable

Last Thursday afternoon Jay got back to me about my contribution to the go fuzz
minimizer to make the [crashers more human
readable](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48129). Initially I was only
simplifying strings and was ignoring byte slices. He suggested that I simplify
byte slices in the same way. This is great because now I just need to extend one
function and the code stays way cleaner. Jay also graciously pointed out an
error I made about assuming that each character is 1 byte. 😖  How embarrassingly
English-centric of me.

I spent most of this morning diving deeper into ASCII vs UTF-8 vs UNICODE and
making sure I wrote my code properly this time. I wrote a test to cover
non-ASCII characters.

Then I thought, hey, this is the perfect time for fuzzing!  So I wrote a fuzz
test for my minimizing function for the go fuzzer! I wrote an approximate
version of the function to test with so that I didn't need the whole fuzzing
infrastructure. I let it run for an hour and nothing failed (except my computer
trying to run other things). Nice!

```
package length

import (
	"testing"
)

func Simplify(v []byte) {
	for i, b := range v {
		candidate := make([]byte, len(v))
		copy(candidate, v)

		// Try to replace every byte with '0'.
		candidate[i] = '0'
		if try(candidate) {
			v = candidate
			continue
		}

		// If '0' doesn't work, then try to replace each byte with a printable,
		// single byte character depending on the original byte's value.
		switch {
		case b < 32 || b >= 127: // Control chars and non-ASCII chars
			candidate[i] = '?'
		case b >= 65 && b <= 90: // Uppercase latin letters A-Z
			candidate[i] = 'A'
		case b >= 97 && b <= 122: // Lowercase latin letters a-z
			candidate[i] = 'a'
		default: // ASCII punctuation and symbols
			candidate[i] = '.'
		}

		if !try(candidate) {
			continue
		}

		// Set v to the new value and continue iterating.
		v = candidate
	}
}

// try is determanistic. the contents really don't matter.
func try(candidate []byte) bool {
	if len(candidate) > 0 && candidate[0] > 100 {
		return true
	}
	return false
}


func FuzzSimplify(f *testing.F) {
	f.Add([]byte("AMELIA"))

	f.Fuzz(func(t *testing.T, b []byte) {
		Simplify(b)
	})
}
```

### 🎥 Lecture 4: Assembly Language & Computer Architecture

At the end of my day I continued watching (but did not yet finish) [this MIT
lecture](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-172-performance-engineering-of-software-systems-fall-2018/lecture-videos/lecture-4-assembly-language-computer-architecture/)
on "Assembly Language & Computer Architecture" that my internet friend
recommended.

In this section he covered some assembly idioms:
* `xor %rax, %rax` - this zeros out the `%rax` register by doing an `XOR` with
  itself. This is how my internet friend showed me to zero things out too.
  Apparently this is faster than having a 0 constant that you move to the
  register.
* ```
test %rcx, %rcx
je DO_SOMETHING
```
  * `test` does a bitwise AND of its two arguments. Then the jump equal (`je`)
    checks the zero flag. The only way a bitwise AND of a register against
    itself is going to be zero is if the register is already zero. So this is an
    idiomatic way to check if `%rcx` is zero and if so, then DO_SOMETHING.


### 🧩 Assembly!

My internet friend challenged me to look up the ["AND - Logical
AND"](https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/manuals/64-ia-32-architectures-software-developer-instruction-set-reference-manual-325383.pdf)
instruction and see if I could improve my `isOddWithNoDiv` function from [Day
24](https://ameowlia.github.io/my-golang-contributor-sabbatical/2021/10/07/day-24.html).
I didn't have time today, but I haven't forgotten kind stranger!
