---
layout: post-with-before-and-after-links
title:  "Day 35: My 'Fix All' Code Action Finally Works"
date:   2021-10-25 11:27:24 -0400
---

🧣 Mood: Wearing many layers inside to avoid turning on the heat.

🎵 Soundtrack: [Ghibli, Anime & Chill](https://open.spotify.com/album/4SFB6GvNUyJ2V0z2BBfGgK)

### 📚 Reading Github Issues
Nothing exciting. I think the number of issues has been cooling down because code freeze is coming
soon.

### 🩺 Making My "Fix All" Code Action

For the past days I have been playing around with making my own silly diagnostic
and code action. I've been doing this to gain familiarity with the gopls
codebase and eventually fix [this
issue](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/44814), which is about adding a "fix all"
option when you highlight a section of code in your editor that has multiple
diagnostics.

So far my route has been:
* Build gopls locally and use my local copy when using VSCode.
* Build my own diagnostic that suggests a change from "amelia" -> "ameowlia".
* Build a "mega" code action that shows up when you highlight code with
  _multiple_ problematic "amelia"s and suggests fixing them all at once. ✨ I
  finally got this working today with a version that does NOT crash or cause the
  blue box of death or fix things incorrectly or fix things multiple times.
* Improve on the previous step by building a generic "mega" code action that
  will group all similar diagnostics and allow you to fix them together. ✨ I
  also got this working today!!!!

<iframe
src="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1xl3MTKX4oY37OlibLF9ayRVafmSdZ82t/preview"
width="640" height="480" allow="autoplay"></iframe>

🎉 So I finally figured out how to make my "mega" code action and where to put
it..... but the code is hacky and def not prod ready. The next step is to write
some tests and refactor!

I took a look at the [tests that are
there](https://github.com/golang/tools/blob/26dbf47d51f729759187f099d5a3fa7ce09160ae/internal/lsp/tests/tests.go#L674-L686)
and they are kinda inscrutable and rely heavily on testdata files and
specifically golden files, which I have never heard of before. I guess it is
time to learn.

### 👑 Golden Files

🎥 I watched [GopherCon 2017: Mitchell Hashimoto - Advanced Testing with
Go](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8hQG7QlcLBk&ab_channel=GopherAcademy). I
found this video because it has a section on Golden Files, but it was also a
good talk about testing in general.

**I learned:**
* Golden files are a way to compare complex test output to a file that has the
  expected result.
* You could read in the golden file and then do a bytes equal or you could do
  something more sophisticated.
* `go test` sets pwd as the package directory. Which is why testdata is always
  stored relative to the package being tested, regardless of where the test is
  actually located.
* Test helpers should never return an error. They should just fail the test so
  you don't have to be making your test more confusing with lots of error
  checking.
* You can add `t.Helper()` to the top of your test helpers. This will give you
  better stack output if your test fails in the helper. It will help you
  determine which test was running that failed.


### 📌 Other Golang Updates

Some other changes I submitted got merged or moved forward:
* I got several more rounds of reviews for my [human-readable fuzz crashers
  feature](https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/go/+/352614). Now it's been
  approved and I'm just waiting for it to run against all the tests before it is
  merged, just in the nick of time before code freeze.
* My testable examples for
  [net/url Values](https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/go/+/356535) and
  [other net/url funcs](https://go-review.googlesource.com/c/go/+/356536) got merged.

