---
layout: post
title:  "Day 6: More Profiling"
date:   2021-09-08 11:27:24 -0400
---

📖 Mood: Excited for new library books

🎵 Soundtrack: [Sour](https://open.spotify.com/album/6s84u2TUpR3wdUv4NgKA2j). On
repeat. All day.

### 📈 Profiling
I skipped reading the new github issues (in the morning at least) and jumped
straight back into the profiling I was doing yesterday with the [Longest Collatz
Sequence](https://projecteuler.net/problem=14). (After doing the mandatory 30
minutes of fighting with expense reports, of course.)

The first thing I realized is that the problem was asking for the longest
collatz sequence under 1 million (1_000_000) and I was running (unsuccessful) tests against 1
trillion (1_000_000_000). Oops! Counting zeros is hard! No wonder I was having
problems optimizing the algorithm enough.

After I lowered the magnitude of difficulty by 1 million my program started
running _much_ more successfully.

I ended up writing three algorithms to compare:
* **No Parallel** - (Slightly misleading because there is _a little_
  parallelization in order to make the code nice and DRY with the other
  algorithms.) I started one goroutine that does one big for loop and calculates
  the collatz sequence for each number sequentially. It sends the results to
  another goroutine that keeps track of the longest.
* **Max Parallel** - I started one goroutine per number. So for checking the
  length of all collatz sequences under 1 million, I started a 1 million
  goroutines. These goroutines send results to another goroutine that keeps
  track of the longest.
* **Batch** - This breaks up the numbers to calculate into a specified batch
  size. Then it starts a goroutine for each batch of numbers. These goroutines
  send results to another goroutine that keeps track of the longest.

I did no optimization around storing answers because I wanted to focus on only
the parallism in the tracing.

**Running with max == 1_000_000**

|  | Real Time Without Profiling |
| --- | ----------- |
| No Parallel | 0m0.730s |
| Max Parallel | 0m0.960s |
| Batched (batch size 1000) | 0m0.498s |

**Running with max == 10_000_000**

|  | Real Time Without Profiling | Real Time With Profiling |
| --- | ----------- | ---- |
| No Parallel | 0m9.796s | 0m34.616s |
| Max Parallel | 0m17.483s | 1m9.528s |
| Batched (batch size 1000) | 0m7.286s | 0m35.698s |

I tried to open the trace for these, but it was taking WAAAAY to long to load.
So I ended up running it with max == 100_000 so the trace was nice and small and
quick to load.

What I observed:
* max parallel was always the worse algorithm
* no parallel was actually a fine algorithm, the parallel optimizations did not
  make much difference at this level of computation
* in the trace I saw that...
  * the no parallel had chunks of empty ("wasted") time for each thread
  * the max parallel showed goroutines taking the longest. I think this is
    because they were CPU starved.
  * the batched had the most uniform goroutine lifespan. I think this is because
    they were not CPU starved.

🔥💻🔥 my laptop will be happy to know that I am done trying to figure out the
longest collatz sequence that starts with a number under 1 trillion.

### 🐞 Applying Profiling to Gorouter

So this all started because I read [this
issue](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48170) yesterday about a common bug
where someone might leak memory when using `time.Tick` in a select statement.
Yesterday I found a place in
[gorouter](https://github.com/cloudfoundry/gorouter/blob/6d52d4a6bd90296263ade679ed3f43ae83b28e31/common/component.go#L45-L53)
(one of the things I maintain) where we do use `time.Tick` in a select
statement.

**Gorouter Code**
```
		timer := time.Tick(RefreshInterval)
		for {
			select {
			case <-timer:
				p.Update()
			case <-p.stopSignal:
				return
			}
		}
```

From looking at this I can tell that we make _one_ timer that is used over and
over. Thus I can safely assume that we are not leaking extra timers all over the
place. But I wanted to prove it with profiling! And I did!

I wrote the following program and got a trace for the good and bad functions:

```
package main

import (
	"time"
	"github.com/pkg/profile"
)

func main() {
	defer profile.Start(profile.TraceProfile, profile.ProfilePath(".")).Stop()
	good()
}

func bad() {
	fooCh := make(chan bool)
	count := 0
	max := 10000

	for {
		select {
		case <-fooCh:
			// does not matter
		case <-time.Tick(time.Millisecond): // leaking tickers
			count++
			if count == max {
				return
			}
		}
	}
}

func good() {
	fooCh := make(chan bool)
	count := 0
	max := 10000

	timer := time.Tick(time.Millisecond)

	for {
		select {
		case <-fooCh:
			// does not matter
		case <-timer:
			count++
			if count == max {
				return
			}
		}
	}
}

```

I loaded the traces and saw graphs that looked something like this:
```
 │ Good Graph
 │
H│
e│
a│
p│
 │
 │
 │--------------------------------
 └────────────────────────────────
  Time


                             ---
 │ Bad Graph              ---
 │                     ---
H│                  ---
e│               ---
a│            ---
p│         ---
 │      ---
 │   ---
 │---
 └────────────────────────────────
  Time

```

🎉 Yay! I was able to prove with profiling that the bad code was leaking memory
and that the good code was not! The gorouter code is safe.

I searched my whole computer for `case <-time.Tick` and I _did_ find it in one
place. Golang! In an older version [this
test](https://github.com/golang/tools/blob/release-branch.go1.15/internal/memoize/memoize_test.go#L153-L155)
has a small memory leak! I was excited to fix it, but the code has since been
refactored to no longer use `time.Tick`. Darn.



### 📚 Reading Github Issues
I ended my day by reading the 26 new github issues since I last checked
yesterday morning.

**Trends**
* Lots of fuzzing issues, including one about improving docs:
  [1](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48265),
  [2](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48255). It really seems like there is
  a lot of development and changes happening around this, and I think I am going
  to pick up my fuzzing explorations again tomorrow. Plus! Improving docs! I'm
  great at that!
* There continues to be issues around generics, another area with a lot of
  development: [1](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48253).
* Go workspace mode! Another
  [proposal](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/45713) I hadn't heard of:
  [1](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48256),
  [2](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48257),
  [3](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48258).
