---
layout: post-with-before-and-after-links
title:  "Day 44 and 45: More Language!!"
date:   2021-11-09 11:27:24 -0400
---

😱 It finally happened. I didn't write a blog post yesterday. Here is two days
worth of ramblings then.

### 🎀 Tying up my Slovak investigation... for now

In the last blog post I wrote I left myself a bunch of notes about my Slovak
investigation. On Monday I condensed those notes even more and wrote [a
comment](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48061#issuecomment-964324971) on
the issue with my findings. In the comment I asked for help from two
contributors to help point me in the next direction to actually get a fix in.

### 🥖 💂‍♂️ Back to detecting the wrong language

11 days ago (thanks github) I wrote up my investigation about an issue where
golang was seemingly matching the wrong language. But it actually wasn't! It was
choosing the right language for very opaque reasons. The author got back to me
about how this is not compatible with "rfc7231 and others".

So I read rfc7231 (it's the http/1.1 RFC, one of my favorites that I reference all
the time for networking things). Turns out there is langauge stuff in there too!
[Section 5.3.5](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231#section-5.3.5) is
about the `Accept-Language` tag. Then I read [rfc4647 about "Matching of Language
Tags"](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4647#section-3).

I _think_ everything go is doing (at least in this area) is compliant.

I found this quote also in [rfc7231 section
5.3.5](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231#section-5.3.5) that seems
very related to the example:

> Note: User agents ought to provide guidance to users when setting a preference,
> since users are rarely familiar with the details of language matching as
> described above. For example, users might assume that on selecting "en-gb", they
> will be served any kind of English document if British English is not available.
> A user agent might suggest, in such a case, to add "en" to the list for better
> matching behavior.

Basically matching is weird. And matching is extra weird when you start
specifying location tags.

### Even more language issues

I am deep into this language stuff now, with only a handful of days left in my
sabbatical, so I thought it might be nice to stay here where I have gained some
small amount of knowledge.

So I looked up other open language issues. [One of them was as repeat of the
matching issue above](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/37662), so I was able
to answer it right away and link to the other issue with a much more detailed
description. Yay!

There are 7 other issues that look interesting. We will see how many I can cover
before I have to end my sabbatical. I am currently digging into [this
one](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/45749) about sorting artificial
languages. Although that may not sound very practical, the result is looking
like golang may _not_ be following rfc4647 when it comes to private tags, which
would affect all languages, not just artificial ones.

🕵️‍♀️ Hopefully I'll get some more investigation done tomorrow.

